The land down under is best known for its vast
and remote outback covering most of the country's
interior. While in reality it is covering
climatic zones ranging from tropical to temperate,
it is best known for its arid center, where the
most extreme landscapes of Australia are forming a
mosaic of salt and red earths, collectively called
the Great Australian Desert. What may seem like a
whole lot of nothingness, is actually a continent
sized system that runs on brief violent pulses of
water, ancient aquifers moving in million year
cycles and explosions of colors where you would
least expect them. To better understand this
enormous system, in this video we will first
get some general context on the most arid parts
of Australia, before traversing half the continent
to see how these deserts actually work.
Chapter 1) Origins of the Australian Desert
First of all, we need to clear up the
misconception of the Great Australian
Desert. When searching for a list of the largest
deserts by area, the so-called “Great Australian
Desert” often takes the 5th spot after the
poles, the Sahara and the Arabian Desert,
but this isn’t entirely correct. Geographically
speaking, there isn’t really a single entity
called the “Great Australian Desert” but instead a
collection of 10 deserts that follow the framework
and limits of the “Interim Biogeographic
Regionalisations for Australia”, that
informally make up the great Australian desert.
These 10 deserts are largely organized into
an eastern and western cluster, but while I have
drawn clear borders between the constituents here,
they are a little bit more fuzzy in reality.
Deserts are commonly defined not by heat,
but by water balance with the rule of thumb that
any area receiving less than 250 millimeters of
rain per year is considered a desert. This rule
however, doesn’t capture many edge cases so the
concept of an aridity index is sometimes used
instead. That index is simply rainfall divided
by the atmosphere’s drying power, meaning how
much water could evaporate given temperature,
sun, humidity, and wind, and in deserts
this index is typically below 0.2.
In the case of our Australian Desert, these
criteria are always met in the core of each
desert, but become less precise around the
margins. Further, unlike deserts like the Sahara
or Arabian Desert, the Australian Deserts can be
a lot more erratic. Sudden cloud bursts can exceed
the precipitation threshold in a single day,
while other years see no precipitation at all.
The transition zones from one desert to
another are also not as precise as I have
drawn here. Instead, it is an approximation,
aggregating various different sources,
that use dominant landforms, vegetation and
drainage patterns to distinguish between the deserts.
Besides the “where”, we should also clarify the
why, since many other regions in the world at the
same latitude are covered in lush forests. The
foremost reason for aridity in Australia's
heart is its general position on the globe. Placed
between the 25° and 35° latitude, the Australian
deserts lie right below a global high pressure
zone around the Tropics of Capricorn. Warm air
over the equator expels most of its moisture as it
rises and cools down, before traveling southwards.
As the air sinks again over the subtropical ridge,
the warming air loses relative humidity, leading
to dry air arriving over the Australian continent.
Further, the West Australian current, as part of
the Antarctic circulation, brings cold waters
to Australia’s western coast, preventing any
significant evaporation from collecting
in the coastal regions. And on the east,
the Great Dividing Range enhances rainfall
on the coastal side and can reduce moisture
penetration inland, contributing to a sharp
wet-to-dry gradient across the continent.
The combination of all of these factors make the
continent of Australia the second driest continent
on the planet after the Antarctic ice desert, but
within these harsh conditions, also lie a lot of
geographical peculiarities which we will travel
through from the west to the east, bringing us to
Chapter 2) The western desert
Starting just behind the coast of
the Dampierland, lies the Great Sandy Desert,
the first of 5 deserts in this larger cluster.
Right off the bat, it boasts some of the highest
temperatures of Australia, which pushes against
the slightly higher precipitation than what you
would typically see in a desert. The average of
300 millimeters of rain that falls annually can
be a bit misleading though, since this region
is known for some of the most erratic weather.
The most extreme region in the north experiences
30 to 40 localized thunderstorms annually, yet
some storms drop little or no measurable rain
at the surface since the hot climate evaporates
any moisture before it reaches the ground in a
process called virga. The weather is not
just erratic on an annual basis though,
and decade long shifts can completely transform
entire regions. Looking at the weather station at
Territory Grape Farm in the Northern Territory
for example, in 1925 precipitation measurements
yielded 25 millimeters of annual rain, while in
1974, this figure skyrocketed to 955 mm, just to
average back down to 310 mm since the 1990s.
When the water does make it through though,
it can often lead to flash floods that submerge
the interdune corridors in a blanket of water,
kicking off an incredible but short-lived
circle of life. Dormant seeds are shooting
out of the ground to form wildflower fields
while insect populations explode and birds
start breeding. Water collects in dozens of
small drainage basins across the western desert,
just to disappear again a few days to weeks after
the most severe rainfall, leading to the flora and
fauna slipping back into dormancy.
Where the dune seas give way to
vegetation, hummock grasses are among the few
plants tough enough to hold on. But in parts of
the Great Victoria Desert, even that disappears.
This region of Australia is one of the most
tectonically stable, meaning that eroding forces
like wind and water had a lot of time to act upon
the same surfaces. While it is not particularly
windy in the Great Victoria Desert, consistency
does the job as well, so in certain areas, nearly
all fine material has been stripped away, leaving
nothing but virtually never ending pebble fields.
These formations are called desert pavement or
gibber fields and while scientists still debate
the details of how fast they form and which
processes dominate in different places, it is
clear why vegetation has a hard time growing here.
Another habitat that is almost devoid of life are
the hundreds of ephemeral lakes scattered around
western deserts. Being filled by the short bursts
of rain, most of these lakes are dried for most of
the year, exposing their reflective salt pans and
organic residue that is left after evaporation.
The largest of these lake basins can cover
hundreds of kilometers in width and length,
though the concept of shoreline is a bit arbitrary
here. The salt crusts and sediment deposits have
flattened out the basins to such an extent that
a few centimeters of water can create a water
coverage of hundreds of square kilometers and
satellite imagery can be quite misleading in
trying to identify water coverage. Clay
rich surfaces can look dark and wet,
despite the absence of water, and pools
on white salt beds can imitate a dry
surface while they are actually submerged.
These mirage forming nature spectacles are
not limited to the western deserts though. As we cross a
semi-arid corridor of plains and mountains to the
east, we are once again greeted by something even
stranger. Before we step into this vast landscape
of ephemeral streams and enormous ancient aquifers
though, let’s take a step back and zoom out for a
bit. The Australian deserts we’ve seen
so far are only a small fraction of the earth’s dryland,
and if you want to test how well you can actually
place these deserts on a map, the sponsor of
this video, Jordglobe Geography has what you are
looking for. You can play countless game modes
where your knowledge of countries, cities, flags,
mountain ranges, islands and deserts is tested.
I’ve been especially enjoying the daily challenges
which combine history and general knowledge with
geography and the duel mode where you
can challenge friends and online users
in a global battle of general knowledge.
If you want to challenge me for a game,
just send a game invite to FactSpark or
follow the link in the description below.
Jordglobe Geography is one of the best ways
to study all the intricacies of geography,
so if you want a more interactive way to deepen
the knowledge on the topics that we’re already
discussing on this channel, download Jordglobe
Geography for free on Google Play or the App
Store. I’ll leave the link in the description
below and now, let's continue with with the second
half of the Great Australian Deserts,
Chapter 3) The eastern deserts
Separated by a series of semi-arid ecoregions
like the Stony Plains, Finke, MacDonnell Ranges
and the Burt Plains to the east, a cluster of 5
more deserts are covering the centermost outback.
The storm driven boom-bust ecosystems of dunes and
gibber fields now transition to a somewhat calmer
ecosystem that is shaped by large ephemeral
rivers and the largest aquifer on the planet.
Spanning 1.7 million square kilometers, roughly
the size of Alaska or countries like Mongolia
or Iran, the Great Artesian Basin underlies
22% of Australia and is a vital lifeline for
the Continent. Alternating layers of porous
sandstone and watertight shale or mudstone
are forming lens shaped bowls reaching from the
great dividing range to the heart of the outback,
trapping groundwater in million year long cycles.
From the highest elevations of New South Wales,
the aquifer reaches up to 3.000 meters into the
ground, and water which enters the exposed porous
layers in the mountains can take up to 2 million
years until it reaches the westernmost extent
under the deserts. Here, natural springs
and seeps, cracks in the impermeable
layers, press the water to the surface, where a
series of surface streams define the landscape.
Between the 5 deserts of the eastern cluster,
the Cooper Creek, Diamantina, Georgina and Finke
rivers all funnel waters from Australia’s largest
drainage basin into the epitome of Australian
salt lakes. Lying above the Tirari Desert in the
center of the eastern cluster, the Kati Thanda,
formerly known as Lake Eyre is the lowest point of
the Australian continent at 15m below sea level,
and the final destination of these waters.
All of these streams are ephemeral rivers, meaning
they run only when favourable conditions line
up. Most years they’re chains of dry channels,
waterholes, and flats, but after big rains in the
wider catchment area, they switch on and behave
less like a normal river network and more like
a pulse-driven wetland system fighting against
the continental aridity.
Despite these sources of water in
the largest drainage basin of the continent, water
reaches the Kati Thanda only on rare occasions.
Exceptional rain bursts are necessary
to create a blanket of water on the salt
pans and in these instances, not just
the Kati Thanda but the drainage basin
as a whole is transformed in its entirety.
The shallow river courses easily overflow,
creating vast wetland regions which make the
whole basin explode with color and life. Lush
green grass patches, scattered with wild flowers
and the white and pink hues of salt and sediments
create one of the most vivid pictures mother
nature has to offer, right in the otherwise
barren deserts of the eastern cluster.
Even during times of flooding however,
Kati Thanda barely fills to its maximum extent.
Since surveys began in the 19th century, there
have only been three instances where the salt pan
of the lake is filled completely, connecting the
two major basins into one continuous system. In
these instances, which last occurred in 1974,
the lake still only reaches a depth of around
6 meter or 20 feet at its deepest levels and
with evaporation rates of up to 3.5 meter per
year, it is always a short lived spectacle.
In 2025, after years of drought, Kati Thanda
finally filled again as is visualized in this
photo series created by NASA’s Terra Satellite,
and the impacts on wildlife have been truly
exceptional. Brine shrimp eggs which have
been dormant in the soil for years suddenly
come to life, and where floodwaters
persist, fish follow, and then pelicans,
banded stilts and many other bird species
join the feast. Once the wetlands fade again,
the dire salt crusts quickly return, and the
fauna that was thriving in abundance now has
to seek refuge in the Mound Springs of the Great
Artesian Basin, waiting for the cycle to repeat.
Overall the ten deserts that make up the broader
Great Australian Desert live in a constant
anticipation of new water. Whether it be through
brief erratic violent storms and flashfloods, or
ancient groundwater with temporary rivers fighting
to complete their course, these biological pulses
are an immaculate example of natural systems
existing on the edge of what is possible.
If you want to see the other side of the Australian
water story, the Murray-Darling Basin is the
perfect opposite. A temperate river system not
challenged by nature’s constraints but instead
by human challenges. You can find that video
here, or watch what YouTube thinks is best for
you here. And thanks again to Jordglobe Geography
for sponsoring this video. Test your geography
knowledge in countless game modes or send me a
challenge for a duel to the Username FactSpark
and see if you can beat me in locating cities and
natural features around the globe. Download the
game now with the link in the description
below. See you in the next one, cheers.